What is NPM?
NPM (Node Package Manager) is a package manager for JavaScript that
effectively manages the packages (modules) of your Node.js projects. With the
use of NPM, developers install, update, and manage dependencies and can
share and publish their own packages.
Features of NPM
There are various features of NPM, such as:
• Workspaces: NPM helps to work on multiple projects in a single
workspace.
• Private Packages: With NPM, users can package privately and share
publicly to a private NPM registry.
• Version Ranges: Specify version ranges for your dependencies so you can
avoid undesirable updates.
• NPM Scripts Lifecycle: NPM defines scripts that are run automatically at
specific life cycles of a package, such as preinstall/postinstall/prepublish.
Along with these, you can get numerous other NPM commands to fully control
your JavaScript project and leverage the full power of packages available in the
ecosystem.
What are NPM commands?
NPM commands are instructions executed through command lines that help in
the management of packages or modules in JavaScript applications. By default,
NPM acts as the package manager for Node.js, making it relatively easy to
install and share libraries as well as tools for application in one’s projects.
Most Commonly Used NPM Commands
Given below is a comprehensive list of the most commonly used NPM
commands along with their descriptions.


1. npm init
This command initializes a new Node.js project by generating a package.json
file containing metadata about the project and its dependencies.
Command: npm init

You can also run it in “default mode” by skipping the setup steps:
Command: npm init –y

2. npm install (or npm i)
This command installs all the dependencies listed in your package.json file. It
also allows you to install specific packages globally or locally within a project.
Install dependencies:
Command: npm install
Install a specific package locally:
Command: npm install &lt;package-name&gt;
Install a specific package globally:
Command: npm install -g &lt;package-name&gt;
Installation Global vs. Local Installations
npm install -g installs a package globally, permitting its usage through your
application by all projects. The best practice, however, is to install a package in
a project to avoid unwanted conflict and to be in control of the same
dependency.


3. npm install for specific package
With this command, developers can install a specific package and add it to the
dependencies section of your package.json file.
Command: npm install &lt;package-name&gt; --save


4. npm install specific packages for development
The given below command is useful in installing a specific package and adding
it to the dependencies section of your package.json. This command is useful
for packages required during development but not in production (for example,
testing frameworks).
Command: npm install &lt;package-name&gt; --save-dev

5. npm uninstall (or npm rm)
This command removes a package from your project. It also removes the
dependency from the package.json file.
Command: npm uninstall &lt;package-name&gt;


6. npm update
As the name suggests, it can update all installed packages to their latest
versions according to the version range specified in the package.json.
Command: npm update


7. npm outdated
This command returns information about the current version, the wanted
version, and the latest version. Therefore, using this command, developers can
get a list of packages that have newer versions available but are not installed
yet in the package.json.
Command: npm outdated


8. npm run
With the run command, you can run a custom script specified in the scripts
section of your package.json. You might use it to test, start servers, or bundle
your files.
Command: npm run &lt;script-name&gt;
Example from package.json
json
{
&quot;scripts&quot;: {
&quot;start&quot;: &quot;node index.js&quot;,
&quot;test&quot;: &quot;jest&quot;
}
}
To run the script: npm run start

• NPM Scripts: NPM scripts are an effortless way of automating the most
common tasks within your project. You might easily define scripts in the scripts
section of your package.json and run them with npm run. For example, you
may have a script that boots up your development server, runs tests, or builds
your project, to mention but a few.


9. npm audit
It scans your project for any vulnerabilities in the libraries it uses and lets you
know about them.
Command: npm audit
There’s another command to fix the vulnerabilities of the libraries.
Command: npm audit fix


10. npm list
For beginners, the swallowing command is very useful. It displays the tree (a
comprehensive list) of installed packages, listing all of your project’s
dependencies in one place.
Command: npm list


11. npm cache clean
The NPM cache is where downloaded packages are stored. Sometimes,
cleaning the cache solves issues with package installation.
Command: npm cache clean --force


12. npm publish
You can publish packages available for others to install. The publishing takes
place on the NPM registry.
Command: npm publish


13. npm version
Get the most used command to increment the version number of your project
according to semantic versioning. It modifies the version field in package.json.
Command: npm version &lt;update_type&gt;